OverTheWire Bandit – Level 3 to Level 4
Simple Notes

In Bandit Level 3 to Level 4, we learn how to find and read a hidden file. This level is simple, but it teaches an important Linux concept: some files are hidden and are not shown when we use the normal ls command. In Linux, hidden files usually start with a dot (.).

After completing Level 2, we log in as bandit3.

Command:
ssh bandit3@bandit.labs.overthewire.org -p 2220

The password used here is the password we found in Level 2.

Once logged in, we can check our current location using pwd.

Command:
pwd

pwd means "print working directory". It tells us which directory we are currently inside.

Next, we use ls to see what is in the current directory.

Command:
ls

We find a directory called:

inhere

The password for the next level is stored in a hidden file inside this directory, so we first move into it using cd.

Command:
cd inhere

cd means "change directory". It is used to move from one directory to another.

Now, if we use normal ls:

Command:
ls

We may not see the hidden file. This is because normal ls does not show hidden files.

To see hidden files, we can use:

Command:
ls -a

The -a option means "all". It tells ls to show all files, including hidden files.

We should now see a file similar to:

.hidden

Files starting with a dot are normally treated as hidden files in Linux. The dot is not part of a special command here; it is simply the naming convention that makes the file hidden from a normal ls listing.

Now we can read the hidden file using cat.

Command:
cat .hidden

cat displays the contents of a file. The output shown by this command is the password for Bandit Level 4.

We can also use the path to the file:

Command:
cat ./.hidden

Here, ./ means the current directory. So ./.hidden means the hidden file named .hidden in the current directory.

The easiest method to remember for this level is:

cd inhere
ls -a
cat .hidden

After getting the password, we can use it to log in to Level 4.

Command to connect to Level 4:

ssh bandit4@bandit.labs.overthewire.org -p 2220

Commands and concepts learned in this level:

ssh
Used to securely connect to the remote Bandit server.

pwd
Shows the current working directory.

ls
Lists files and directories in the current directory. By default, it does not show hidden files.

cd
Means "change directory". It is used to move into another directory.

ls -a
Lists all files, including hidden files. The -a means "all".

cat
Displays the contents of a file.

Hidden files
In Linux, a file whose name starts with a dot (.) is normally hidden from a normal ls listing. Hidden does not mean the file is protected or encrypted. It mainly means it is not shown by default.

./
Means the current directory. It can be used when giving the path of a file in the current directory.

The main thing I learned from this level is that not seeing a file with ls does not always mean that the file is not there. It might be hidden. Using ls -a lets us see hidden files, and then we can use cat to read the file.

The basic flow of Level 3 to Level 4 is:

1. Log in as bandit3 using SSH.
2. Use pwd to check the current directory.
3. Use ls to see the available directory.
4. Move into the inhere directory using cd.
5. Use ls and notice that the hidden file is not shown.
6. Use ls -a to show hidden files.
7. Find the .hidden file.
8. Use cat .hidden to read it.
9. The output is the password for Level 4.
10. Use that password to log in as bandit4.

This level teaches a useful Linux habit: if you are told that a file is hidden, do not assume it is missing. Use ls -a to check for files whose names start with a dot. This is useful when working with configuration files and other hidden files in Linux.
