OverTheWire Bandit – Level 19 to Level 20
Simple Notes

In Bandit Level 19 to Level 20, we learn how to use a special program that is owned by bandit20 and has the setuid permission enabled. The program is called bandit20-do. It can be used to run commands as the bandit20 user. The goal is to use this program to read the password for the next level.

After completing Level 18, we have the password needed to connect as bandit19.

First, we can list the files in the home directory:

Command:
ls -la

We can see a file/program called bandit20-do. This is the new program we need to understand.

The important concept in this level is setuid. Setuid allows a program to run with the permissions of the file owner instead of the user who runs it.

We can check the permissions of bandit20-do with:

Command:
ls -l bandit20-do

The permissions show an s where the normal execute permission would be. This tells us that the setuid bit is enabled.

The bandit20-do program is owned by bandit20, so when we use it, the command can be executed with bandit20's permissions.

We can see how the program works by running:

Command:
./bandit20-do

It shows that we can use it to execute a command as another user.

The basic format is:

Command:
./bandit20-do command

For example, we can run:

Command:
./bandit20-do id

The id command shows information about the current user and groups. When it is run through bandit20-do, we can see that the command is running with the permissions of bandit20.

The main trick is to use bandit20-do to read the password file for bandit20.

Command:
./bandit20-do cat /etc/bandit_pass/bandit20

Here, cat reads the password file, while bandit20-do gives the command the permissions needed to read it.

The password printed by this command is the password we need for Level 20.

New commands and concepts learned in this level:

ls -l
Shows detailed information about files, including their permissions, owner, and group.

./bandit20-do
Runs a command using the permissions of the bandit20 user because the program has the setuid bit enabled.

id
Shows the current user ID, group ID, and group information. It is useful for checking which user a command is running as.

Setuid
Setuid is a Linux permission that allows an executable program to run with the permissions of its owner. In this level, bandit20-do is owned by bandit20, so it can run commands with bandit20's permissions.

The main thing I learned from this level is that file permissions can give a program different privileges from the user who starts it. The setuid bit is especially important because it can allow a program to run with the permissions of its owner.

The basic flow of Level 19 to Level 20 is:

1. Log in as bandit19.
2. Look at the files and find bandit20-do.
3. Check its permissions with ls -l.
4. Understand that it has the setuid permission and is owned by bandit20.
5. Use ./bandit20-do to run a command as bandit20.
6. Use cat to read /etc/bandit_pass/bandit20.
7. Save the password and use it to log in to bandit20.

This level teaches an important Linux security concept: a program with setuid permissions can execute commands with the privileges of its owner, so understanding file ownership and permissions is very important.

Source: Official OverTheWire Bandit Level 19 → Level 20 page.
