OverTheWire Bandit – Level 2 to Level 3
Simple Notes

In Bandit Level 2 to Level 3, we learn how to work with file names that contain spaces. This level is simple, but it teaches an important Linux concept: spaces normally separate different arguments in a command, so a filename containing spaces needs to be handled carefully.

After completing Level 1, we log in as bandit2.

Command:
ssh bandit2@bandit.labs.overthewire.org -p 2220

The password used here is the password we found in Level 1.

Once logged in, we can check our current location using pwd.

Command:
pwd

pwd means "print working directory". It tells us which directory we are currently inside.

Next, we use ls to see the files.

Command:
ls

We find a file with a name that contains spaces:

--spaces in this filename--

The spaces are important because Linux normally uses spaces to separate different parts of a command.

If we try to use the filename directly like this:

cat --spaces in this filename--

Linux may think that "in" and "this" and "filename--" are separate arguments instead of one filename.

One easy way to solve this is to put the filename inside quotes.

Command:
cat "--spaces in this filename--"

The quotes tell the shell that everything inside them should be treated as one filename.

Another way is to use a backslash before every space.

Command:
cat --spaces\ in\ this\ filename--

The backslash tells the shell that the following space is part of the filename and should not be treated as a separator.

We can also use the path to the file:

cat "./--spaces in this filename--"

This combines the use of "./" and quotes. "./" means the current directory.

The easiest method to remember for this level is:

cat "./--spaces in this filename--"

The command displays the contents of the file, and the text shown is the password for Bandit Level 3.

We can then use that password to log in to Level 3.

Command to connect to Level 3:

ssh bandit3@bandit.labs.overthewire.org -p 2220

Commands and concepts learned in this level:

ssh
Used to securely connect to the remote Bandit server.

pwd
Shows the current working directory.

ls
Lists files and directories in the current directory.

cat
Displays the contents of a file.

Quotes " "
Used to tell the shell that spaces inside the quotes are part of one argument. This is useful when a filename contains spaces.

Backslash Used to escape a special character. For example, writing "\ " tells the shell that the space is part of the filename.

./
Means the current directory. It can be used to specify a file located in the current directory.

The main thing I learned from this level is that spaces have a special meaning in the Linux terminal. Normally, a space separates different arguments. Because the filename in this level contains spaces, we need to tell Linux that the complete name is actually one filename.

The basic flow of Level 2 to Level 3 is:

1. Log in as bandit2 using SSH.
2. Use pwd to check the current directory.
3. Use ls to see the files.
4. Notice that the filename contains spaces.
5. Understand that spaces normally separate command arguments.
6. Use quotes or backslashes to handle the spaces.
7. Use cat to read the file.
8. The output is the password for Level 3.
9. Use that password to log in as bandit3.

This level teaches a very useful Linux habit: whenever a filename contains spaces, surround the filename with quotes or escape the spaces with backslashes. This becomes especially useful when working with files from the terminal.
