OverTheWire Bandit – Level 1 to Level 2
Simple Notes

In Bandit Level 1 to Level 2, we learn how to read a file whose name starts with a hyphen (-). This level is useful because Linux treats names beginning with "-" as options in many commands, so we have to tell the command clearly that the name is a file.

After completing Level 0, we log in as bandit1.

Command:
ssh bandit1@bandit.labs.overthewire.org -p 2220

The password used here is the password we found in the previous level.

Once logged in, we can check where we are using pwd.

Command:
pwd

pwd means "print working directory". It shows the current directory.

Then we use ls to see the files.

Command:
ls

This time, we see a file named:

-

The file name is just a single hyphen. This creates a small problem because "-" is normally used by Linux commands to indicate an option.

For example, commands often look like this:

command -option

So if we simply try:

cat -

cat may not treat "-" as a normal filename. Instead, "-" has a special meaning for many Unix programs, often meaning standard input.

To tell cat that we want to read the file named "-", we can use:

cat ./-

Here, "./" means the current directory. So "./-" clearly tells Linux that "-" is a file in the current directory.

The command:

cat ./-

displays the contents of the file. The text displayed is the password for Bandit Level 2.

We can then use that password to log in to Level 2.

Command to connect to Level 2:

ssh bandit2@bandit.labs.overthewire.org -p 2220

Commands and concepts learned in this level:

ssh
Used to securely connect to the remote Bandit server.

pwd
Shows the current working directory.

ls
Lists the files and directories in the current directory.

cat
Displays the contents of a file.

./
Means the current directory. It can be used to specify a file located in the current directory.

-
A hyphen has a special meaning in many Linux commands because it is commonly used for command options. If a filename itself starts with "-", we may need to specify its path to make the command understand that it is a filename.

The main thing I learned from this level is that file names can sometimes have special characters that confuse normal Linux commands. The file "-" looks simple, but directly using "cat -" does not work the way we want. Using "cat ./-" removes the confusion because "./-" clearly represents a file called "-" in the current directory.

The basic flow of Level 1 to Level 2 is:

1. Log in as bandit1 using SSH.
2. Use pwd to check the current directory.
3. Use ls to see the files.
4. Notice that the file is named "-".
5. Understand that "-" has a special meaning in Linux commands.
6. Use cat ./- to read the file.
7. The output is the password for Level 2.
8. Use that password to log in as bandit2.

This level teaches a small but important Linux trick: when a filename starts with a special character such as "-", using its path (for example, "./-") can help Linux understand that we mean the file itself and not a command option.
