OverTheWire Bandit – Level 22 to Level 23
Simple Notes

In Bandit Level 22 to Level 23, we learn more about cron jobs and how to understand a shell script that uses variables to create a temporary filename. The password for the next level is stored in a file, but the cron job creates the filename using a hash.

After completing Level 21, we have the password needed to connect as bandit22.

First, we can look at the cron jobs:

Command:
ls -la /etc/cron.d/

We can find the cron job related to bandit23.

Then we can read its configuration:

Command:
cat /etc/cron.d/cronjob_bandit23

This shows which script is being executed by the cron job.

The script is located at:

/usr/bin/cronjob_bandit23.sh

We can read the script with:

Command:
cat /usr/bin/cronjob_bandit23.sh

The important thing in this script is that it uses variables and the md5sum command to create the name of a temporary file.

The script contains something similar to:

myname=$(whoami)

mytarget=$(echo I am user $myname | md5sum | cut -d ' ' -f 1)

The first command gets the username of the user running the script.

The second command creates an MD5 hash from the text and uses that hash as part of the filename.

We can run the commands ourselves to find out what filename the script creates.

Command:
whoami

The whoami command tells us which user we are currently logged in as.

In this level, the important thing is that the cron job runs as bandit23, not as bandit22. Therefore, when the script runs, the value of whoami is bandit23.

We can calculate the same filename with:

Command:
echo I am user bandit23 | md5sum

This gives us an MD5 hash.

The script then uses cut to take only the hash part:

Command:
echo I am user bandit23 | md5sum | cut -d ' ' -f 1

The -d option tells cut which delimiter to use. Here, the delimiter is a space. The -f 1 option selects the first field.

Once we know the filename, we can read the file created by the cron job:

Command:
cat /tmp/<hash>

The file contains the password for bandit23.

New commands and concepts learned in this level:

whoami
Shows the username of the current user. It is useful when we need to know which user a script is running as.

md5sum
Creates an MD5 checksum or hash from input. In this level, it is used to generate a predictable filename.

cut
Used to remove parts of text and select specific fields from a line.

cut -d ' ' -f 1
Uses a space as the delimiter and selects the first field from the output.

$(command)
This is command substitution. It runs a command and puts its output into another command or variable.

Variables
Variables store values that can be used later in a script. In this level, the script uses a variable for the username and another variable for the generated filename.

The main thing I learned from this level is that we should read and understand scripts instead of just running them. Even when a filename looks random because it is created using a hash, we can reproduce the same commands and calculate exactly what the filename will be.

The basic flow of Level 22 to Level 23 is:

1. Log in as bandit22.
2. Find the cron job for bandit23.
3. Read the cron job configuration.
4. Find and read the script being executed.
5. Notice that the script uses whoami, md5sum, and cut.
6. Understand that the script runs as bandit23.
7. Recreate the commands with bandit23 as the username.
8. Calculate the hash and find the temporary filename.
9. Use cat to read the file and get the password for bandit23.

This level teaches an important Linux scripting concept: variables and command substitution can be used to build filenames dynamically, and we can understand the result by following the commands used inside the script.

Source: Official OverTheWire Bandit Level 22 → Level 23 page.
